WHERE IS SORLANDET - automatic updating
=======================================

GitHub's own scheduler has never started a single run in your repository
("0 workflow run results" for event:schedule). That is a known GitHub weakness
on free repositories and there is nothing in the repository we can fix to make
it reliable.

So we stop relying on it. From now on each run works for about 5 hours and then
starts the next one itself. A chain that keeps going without you.

Do these three things, in this order. Ten minutes.


STEP 1 - upload the files
-------------------------
In your repository: Add file -> Upload files.
Drag in the CONTENTS of this folder (not the folder itself):

    index.html
    scripts/   (folder)
    data/      (folder)

Write "Automatic updating" as the commit message and press
"Commit changes".

Note: the .github folder will not come along - Finder hides names that start
with a dot. Step 2 handles it.


STEP 2 - replace the workflow
-----------------------------
In your repository, open:  .github/workflows/update.yml
Press the pencil (Edit this file) at the top right.

Select everything in the editor (Cmd+A) and delete it.
Then open the file "update.yml.txt" from this folder, copy everything,
and paste it in.

Press "Commit changes" -> "Commit changes".


STEP 3 - the key that lets a run start the next one
---------------------------------------------------
A run is not allowed to start another run with GitHub's built-in token. That is
a deliberate GitHub rule against infinite loops. We therefore give it a key of
its own, limited to exactly this one repository.

3a. Create the key

    Open:  https://github.com/settings/personal-access-tokens/new

    Token name .......... sorlandet-chain
    Expiration .......... Custom -> 30 June 2027   (after graduation)
    Resource owner ...... your own user
    Repository access ... Only select repositories -> Sorlandet
    Permissions ......... Repository permissions -> find "Actions"
                          -> set it to "Read and write"
                          (leave everything else at "No access")

    Press "Generate token" at the bottom.
    The key appears once, starting with github_pat_. Copy it now.
    Do not paste it into our chat - I do not need it.

3b. Store it in the repository

    Your repository -> Settings -> Secrets and variables -> Actions
    -> New repository secret

    Name .... DISPATCH_TOKEN
    Secret .. paste the key

    Press "Add secret".


STEP 4 - start the chain once
-----------------------------
Actions -> Update position -> Run workflow -> Run workflow.

That is the last time you have to touch it.


STEP 5 - the visitor counter (optional, 2 minutes)
-------------------------------------------------
The page can show how many people have looked at it, at the very bottom. It is
switched OFF in the file you just uploaded, and stays off until you do this -
nothing is sent anywhere before that.

  1. Go to goatcounter.com and sign up. Pick a code; say you choose
     "sorlandet", your dashboard is then at sorlandet.goatcounter.com
  2. In its Settings, tick "Allow adding visitor counts on your website".
     That is what lets the number appear on your page. It is off by default
     there so nothing leaks by accident.
  3. In your repository open index.html, press the pencil, and find this line
     near the top of the script (search for COUNTER_CODE):

         const COUNTER_CODE = "";

     Put your code between the quotes:

         const COUNTER_CODE = "sorlandet";

     Commit changes.

That is it. Within a few minutes the bottom of the page reads something like
"37 visits to this page". Your own dashboard at sorlandet.goatcounter.com
shows more - which days, which countries, which pages.

WHAT IT DOES AND DOES NOT DO
It uses no cookies and stores nothing in anyone's browser. A visit is counted
on their server by hashing site + IP + browser in memory for eight hours and
saving only a random number - the IP and the browser string never reach their
disk. Anyone who has "Do Not Track" switched on is not counted at all.

Read the number honestly, though. "Visits" means unique browsers over an
eight-hour window, not people. You on your phone and you on your laptop is
two. A parent who checks in the morning and again at night is two. And the
total on the page is cached for up to four hours at their end, so it lags a
little; your own dashboard is current.

If you would rather not have it at all, do nothing. Leaving COUNTER_CODE
empty is a complete answer.


HOW TO CHECK THAT IT IS RUNNING
-------------------------------
Actions. You should see a new "Update position" run appear every ~5 hours,
each one started by the previous one. Open the newest run and look at the last
step, "Start the next run". It should say:

    Next run requested - the chain continues.

If it says "No DISPATCH_TOKEN secret" the secret name is misspelled.
If it says "Could not start the next run (HTTP 403)" the token is missing
the Actions: Read and write permission, or was not given access to this
repository.


WHAT EACH RUN DOES
------------------
First a quick pass: one twenty-second pass that refreshes the weather, the
route and the forecast straight away, committed as "Refresh". Without it a
restarted run changes nothing on the page for 29 minutes, because the script
spends its whole listening window before it writes anything - which looks
exactly like a broken deploy.

Then eleven rounds of 29 minutes. Every round now reads THREE position sources
instead of two:

  1. The ship's own position page (new). The foundation publishes a plain
     public JSON list of the last 500 fixes, about one every seven minutes -
     a rolling window of the last two and a half days. This is the densest
     and most reliable of the three, and it needs no key at all.
  2. BarentsWatch - the Norwegian Coastal Administration, very dense, but
     only inside the Norwegian economic zone.
  3. aisstream.io - volunteer receivers, worldwide, thin.

Everything lands in the same pot keyed by timestamp, so the same fix heard by
two sources folds into one point. The Position card on the page now says which
source supplied the position you are looking at.

Then the round recalculates the weather and waves along the route she is
actually likely to sail, and pushes it all to the repository. The page picks it
up on its own.

THE NASA CARD IS GONE
--------------------
There was a "From orbit" card with two NASA pictures of her weather. It is
removed. Those images are 375 m per pixel and Sorlandet is 64 m, so she is a
fifth of one pixel - and they will never get better, because that would have
to come from the satellite. It was also the same data as the Satellite button
on the map, which you can at least zoom and wind back in time.

The Satellite button stays. The pictures where she is actually IN the image
are Sentinel-2, and they have their own card below.

SEEN FROM SPACE
--------------
An album, and the only section where the ship itself is in the picture:
Sentinel-2 at 10 m per pixel, 37 times finer than the weather satellites.
Every pass that photographed the patch of sea she was in gets a tile. Tap one
to open that scene in ESA's own viewer and zoom in yourself.

Two rows, and the first is the good one:

  ALONGSIDE  Port calls, bigger tiles, cropped to 500 m. She is standing
             still and the quay next to her is a known length, so you have
             something to measure her against.

  AT SEA     Under way, 800 m across. She is the only thing out there, which
             is the whole pleasure - but she is six pixels, so look for a
             bright streak, not a ship.

Those port calls will be most of the album: every port on the voyage has
coverage, the ocean crossings have none, and she arrives somewhere every ten
days.

If nothing has been caught yet the card still shows up and says so, and names
the next port where there is a real chance. A card that just disappears looks
broken; one that explains itself does not. And if the crop server is having a
bad day, each tile says "Crop unavailable - open it at ESA" and keeps its
link, instead of leaving you a row of broken image icons.

The pictures only download when you scroll down to them, so they cost a phone
nothing until you look.

Measured, not guessed: every port on the voyage has Sentinel-2 coverage, so
the close passes come at departures and arrivals. The ocean crossings have
none, and neither do Vigo-Funchal or Las Palmas-Mindelo despite looking
coastal. Best window of the whole trip is October to December around Madeira,
Sevilla and the Canaries, where nearly every pass is cloud-free.
New card. A job now searches, once an hour, for satellite passes that
ACTUALLY looked at her - not scenes near where she is today, but scenes whose
footprint contained her at the instant that scene was taken.

Only cloud-free Sentinel-2 is listed - 10 m optical, where she is about six
pixels with a wake.

Radar (Sentinel-1) was tried and dropped. It is the better sensor in
principle: through cloud, in the dark, over ocean ESA does not photograph.
But its pixels are in a paid bucket, so all the page could show was a link to
a grey scene with neither ship nor coastline in it. Not worth a row.

It worked the first week: Sentinel-2 caught her on 26 August at 10:45 UTC
under 0 % cloud.

The card shows three panels, widest first, because a blue square with a white
speck means nothing without somewhere to be. The wide one is widened until a
coastline is in frame - 1,000 km in the North Sea, about 2,900 km on the
crossing to Brazil, which puts the Brazilian coast in the corner.

ALSO CHANGED
------------
The Course card is gone; six rows for one idea was too much. Hover the purple
line on the map instead - it says how long the fastest passage takes and how
much time the plan leaves in hand.

Event log now shows the last 24 hours and scrolls.

SATELLITE PICTURES
------------------
New button: Satellite. It swaps the map for the actual picture from orbit,
from NASA's imagery service. Free, no key.

  In the North Sea      yesterday's pass, 375 m per pixel
  West of about 12 W    GOES-East, a new picture every 10 MINUTES

So from November, when she is out past the Azores and crossing to Brazil, the
whole Atlantic passage is visible almost live. Wind the time slider back and
the clouds wind back with it - you see the weather she actually sailed
through, from space, on the day she was in it.

It does NOT show the ship. She is 64 m long; the sharpest of these pictures is
375 m to a pixel. What you see is her weather.

The badge next to the slider says which satellite the picture came from and
how old it is.

ESTIMATED COURSE
----------------
New button above the map: Course. It shows where the wind forecast would push
her if she sailed for speed - not the drawn line to the port, but a beat with
the tacks worked out, because a full-rigged ship cannot point within about 58
degrees of the wind. A ring marks every tack. Recomputed from her actual
position on every run.

The card under it gives the number that explains the voyage:

  Fastest passage    about 39 h to Lerwick
  The plan allows    264 h
  Time in hand       9.5 days

That is why she wanders. They are not making for Shetland - they are sailing a
school ship around the North Sea with a fortnight to do it in. When those two
numbers get close, she is on passage and the estimate is worth watching.

The polar diagram behind it is an estimate: her real one is not published, so
it is built from her dimensions and sail area plus how square riggers behave.
It says where the wind would push a ship like her, not what the master will do.

WHAT SHE REPORTS ABOUT HERSELF
-----------------------------
New card: Event log. Ordinary AIS carries two things besides position - the
navigational status in every report, and the voyage block the crew type in by
hand. So the page can now show what a tracking site shows, derived from the
same fields:

  Under way under sail        status 8
  Under way using engine      status 0
  At anchor / Moored          status 1 / 5
  Destination reported        the crew's entry
  ETA reported                the crew's entry
  Draught reported            the crew's entry
  Back in AIS coverage        after a silence of six hours or more

Only changes are listed, and a status must hold for two fixes before it counts,
so a single stray report while she tacks does not fill the log with noise.

Three map layers now: Wind, Waves, Weather. The third is sky and temperature at
each grid point, and it costs no extra API call - it rides along in the wind
request. It starts off; the other two start on.

Day by day has a third chart: Highest wave.

Two cards were removed - "Waves where she is now" and "Weather where she is
now". They ran forward in time from a fixed point, which contradicts the route
ahead now being paced to the plan.

THE CLOCK
---------
The On board card is now "Clock in <port>" - the time ashore where she is
lying, or in the port she is heading for. A city clock, with how many hours
that is from yours.

It used to say "GMT, 2 hours behind you" while she was 25 nm off Norway. That
came from asking for the time zone AT THE SHIP: near a coast you get the
nearest country's zone, out at sea you get plain GMT, and the card would have
jumped between the two for reasons that had nothing to do with the ship.

Sunrise and sunset are now fetched in UTC and converted to the port's time by
the page, so the clock and the sun always agree.

IF THE PAGE LOOKS OLD
--------------------
GitHub serves the page with a 10-minute cache, and a page added to a phone's
home screen can hold on to it far longer. So the page now checks its own
source for a newer build and reloads itself once, quietly. If it still cannot
get a fresh copy it says so at the top instead of leaving you looking at last
week's version.

Run scripts/stamp_build.py after editing index.html by hand - it writes the
build id the check compares against.

WINDING TIME BACK
-----------------
The slider under the map now starts 48 hours ago, not at now. Drag it left
and the ship moves to where she actually was at that hour (orange), the
stretch she has sailed since is drawn on top of the track, and the wind
arrows and wave chevrons rewind to the weather that was there. The panel
under the map reads out her position, how far she has come since, her speed
then, and the wind and sea she was in.

Drag it the other way and it does the mirror image: she moves to where she
is EXPECTED to be at that hour - hollow marker, so it never reads as a real
position - and the panel gives the wind and sea she is sailing into, plus how
far she still has to run to the port. Past her estimated arrival it says she
is alongside rather than pretending she is still at sea.

  Play    the whole span through, one hour per 150 ms
  Now     jump back to the present

The slider spans 48 hours back to 72 hours ahead, one hour per step. Two days
of what happened, three of what is coming, on one control. It opens on NOW,
not at either end.

It fills in from now on, so the first morning you will only see back to when
this run started. After a day it reaches the full 48 hours.

Hours with no AIS position - a silence longer than three hours - are simply
absent, and the panel says so. Drawing a line through a two-day gap in
mid-Atlantic would be an invention, not a position.

THE WEATHER MAP IS DENSER NOW
-----------------------------
On a phone the wind and wave grid had thinned out to 3 x 3 - nine arrows for a
whole screen, which tells you nothing about a weather system. That was there
for speed: every arrow was a separate little drawing the browser had to move
every time you dragged the map, so more arrows meant a slower page.

They are now all painted onto one single picture instead, redrawn once per
frame rather than one at a time. Eighty arrows now cost about what four used
to, so the number of them is set by what you can actually tell apart on the
screen: a phone gets 6 x 6, a laptop 6 x 14. That is 72 glyphs on a phone
where there were 18, and it is faster than before, not slower.

Two smaller things came with it. The arrows are spaced evenly across the
SCREEN rather than evenly by latitude, which matters when you zoom out to the
whole voyage - the map stretches the north, so an even set of latitudes came
out bunched up near Norway and spread out near the equator. And each grid
point now gives its three glyphs their own corner - sky and temperature above,
wind left, waves right - because at this spacing they were sitting on top of
each other.

Hover an arrow and you get the numbers in words: wind speed and Beaufort
force, wave height and period, sky and temperature. On a phone, tap it.


WHY SOURCE 1 CHANGES THINGS
---------------------------
It is a rolling window, not a live stream. So a run that starts within two days
of the last one collects every fix in between - including the hours when nothing
was listening.

In practice that means missed runs no longer cost you anything. A broken chain,
a GitHub outage, a night where nothing fired: the next run fills the hole rather
than drawing a straight line across it. The track repairs itself.

It also means a fix can belong in the middle of the track, not only at the end,
so the script now merges positions by time instead of appending them.


IF THE CHAIN EVER BREAKS
------------------------
It can only break if a run dies so hard that even the final step does not run,
or if the token expires. The hourly cron is still in the file as a backstop for
the day GitHub's scheduler decides to work. Restarting it by hand is
Actions -> Update position -> Run workflow, exactly as in step 4.
